Most AI consulting proposals suck
because they are essentially just pitch
decks with credit card forms at the end.
They entirely miss the whole consulting
part. What I want to do here is show you
a framework that a $10,000 consulting
proposal should follow if you want any
chance of closing a high ticket client
for your service. So, I run an agency
called Leftclick and we've worked with
everything from local businesses that
make 10K a month to literal
multi-billion dollar business
portfolios. Before this, I co-owned a PR
company that had worked with some very
big organizations including a literal
space agency. uh and before that I had
started and failed at something like
five other agencies/service businesses.
So after you send many hundreds of
proposals for many millions of dollars
in pipeline value collectively, you tend
to learn what works and what doesn't. In
this video, I'm going to cover what
works and I'm also going to give you
guys a very straightforward template you
guys could use for any proposal of yours
moving forward for whatever service,
whether it's AI, marketing, or what have
you. All right, so here's the thing that
a lot of people get wrong right off the
bat. And it's kind of understandable
because of the term proposal. It's kind
of in the name. You're proposing
something. People naturally think
proposals are about proposing a
solution, and that's actually a mistake.
A proposal is not about proposing a
solution, at least not at the small to
mid-size business level, which is where
I spend most of my time. A proposal is a
test where the client wants to see, do
you clearly understand the problem that
I am suffering from? And can you
articulate it back to me better than I
can myself? The answer to that question
is yes, I'm going to work with you. If
not, screw off. So at Leftclick we
follow a problem first framework which
just means at minimum at least 50% of
the entire proposal is just about
diagnosing the problem and paraphrasing
that problem to illustrate that we know
what they're talking about and then you
know if possible actually quantifying
the pain and the problem in terms of
dollars. The other 50% is split between
the actual proposed solution which is
what most people spend the entire
proposal focusing on. We do that less
than 50%, the logistics, uh the legal
and then ideally some sort of like
payment mechanism is attached directly
to the proposal just to cut down on the
number of steps. So more than half of
the proposal is upfront literally just
talking about the problem and I'll run
you through an example of what that
looks like. One of the biggest proposals
I ever won was for a marketing agency
where the initial size of the engagement
was about $5,000, but then I got them on
a recurring relationship which over the
course of our engagement made me over
100 grand. That proposal was almost 20
pages long. Every page was 300 to 400
words on it. I'm not saying you should
do this. Very much a special case. But
of the 20 pages of that proposal, I
literally spent the first 10 talking all
about the problems of the business. So,
this included sections like your team is
heavily misallocating your time and it's
costing you over $20,000 a month. Here
are the three reasons why. That's almost
verbatim from the actual proposal. I
then went heavily into detail about how
the business owner was allocating their
time. And then I wrote the entire thing
in first person so that he would
understand I was talking about him
directly. It was me to him, not me to
his business. So, I'm not telling you
that you guys need to write a big
monster long proposal. It's a very
special case again, one where I kind of
put my balls on the table. But what I am
telling you is at the very beginning of
your proposal, instead of writing a big
fancy executive summary, my
recommendation is to use language like
this. The misallocation of your time is
costing you X dollars per month. Here is
why. Lack of structured management is
costing you dollars per month. Here is
why. Hesitance to restructure your
business is costing you Z dollar per
month. Here is why. Your bottleneck is
thing and it is costing you amount. Here
is why. By not solving thing, you will
continue to feel pain and it will
eventually result in some outcome. Here
is why. So, if you contrast this with
the one-page solutionbased proposals
that the vast majority of competitors
are sending, you stand out like crazy.
This is kind of a crass example, and you
know, I think it'll probably put some
people off, but I actually think about
proposals kind of like foreplay in
relationship. Like, if you have a little
bit at the beginning, the rest of your
proposal will be received a lot better.
And I think that's a good mental model
for just, you know, continuing forward
with pitching services. If you guys can
focus on their problem first, you warm
them up to the idea of your solution. I
would never just dive right into the
solution without doing that obligatory
warm-up. So, with all that said,
diagnosing problems randomly just does
not work. There's actually specific
structure that consultants use to
clarify the chaos, and that's what I'm
going to show you next. So, most people
present messy problems to clients that
are vague and unspecified. But the whole
purpose of a high-quality consultant is
that you bring clarity to their mess. A
simple way that we use to improve our
ability to do this is something called
the MECE driver tree method, which
sounds really fancy. It's not at all. I
don't know why the hell consultants
throw fancy terms around all the time,
but it's very simple. MECE stands for
mutually exclusive, collectively
exhaustive. Okay, big fancy term, but
basically when you identify the problems
a customer is facing, you just use this
framework to break all of those problems
down very logically into a little tree
where their goal is at the top, the
primary drivers of that goal are
underneath and then the subdrivers
behind each driver are beneath that. The
whole purpose of this is to make your
problems interpretable, but also so that
the client can actually follow along
with your reasoning. And what I think
you realize after enough sales
experience is a big chunk of your value
is not actually convincing somebody of
something. It is getting them to
convince themselves and the whole
purpose of simple visualization and MEC
driver tree methods like this is just
illustrating a chain of very simple
reasoning then putting it in front of
them to have them believe it themselves.
A lot of the time that's actually all
you need to have somebody agree to what
it is uh that you are providing and
certainly that like what you're pitching
them is affordable or maybe reasonable
to pay. So the whole idea behind MEC is
you basically just take this problem
like make more money which is very vague
and then you break it down into the
contributors to how to make money and
then you just make sure that every
contributor is mutually exhaustive and
then just run them through one by one.
Practical example in the proposal I was
talking about you know I listed the
goals of the company as I saw them and
one of those goals was that the guy
wanted to scale to $300,000 a month in
12 months. Now at the time the company
was somewhere around $100,000 a month in
revenue. So logically the question we
needed to answer was how do we go from
100,000 to 300,000 aka how do we add you
know $200,000 in 12 months or so. We
then broke it down really really simply
cuz well if you want to make more
revenue you can either do so one of two
ways. You can have your current client
base pay you more or you get a larger
client base. Now these are simple and
mutually exclusive drivers. Obviously we
ended up doing a combination of both but
this made things very easy for the
customer to understand at the time. And
from there the next question was okay so
how do we actually get our current
client base to pay us more and then how
do we get a larger client base as well.
So logically to get a current client
base to pay you more you have to
increase your price per customer and to
do that you can either increase your
price without materially changing your
offer or you can improve your offer and
increase the price alongside it.
Obviously again we ended up doing a
mixture of both to increase our client
base. You could double down on
advertising methods that are already
working where you guys could find new
advertising methods right so in this way
it sounds really really simple but when
you break things down in front of your
customer in that manner especially if
it's a small to mid-size business level
where you know people typically don't
have the ability to reason about
business problems like this because
they're usually too busy actually
managing or running the business you can
add a tremendous amount of value and you
can make whatever price you're going to
offer seem very reasonable by
comparison. So when I did this with him,
I wasn't really convincing him of the
value of the service. He was sort of
convincing himself because he was
walking through that logic himself. So
using thinking tools like driver trees
in your proposals makes it clear that
you are now bringing advisor level
value. You're not just pitching people
like a small commoditized service or a
rookie. And I only know that because
these are the frameworks that
consultants use on me when I'm trying to
get them to work with me, okay? When I'm
hiring them. I just found that when I
applied those same strategies to my own
business, I made way more money, which
is why I do it all the time. But even if
you're perfect at diagnosing the problem
and then using MEC driver trees and
whatnot to run through how they work, if
the client doesn't feel that the pain
that they are currently experiencing is
expensive, they are not going to be
willing to pay you money. So how exactly
do you do that? A $10,000 proposal is
only going to land if the problem that
the customer feels is bigger than
$10,000 significantly so. And so
generally you always want to charge a
small fraction of the value that you are
providing. And the fraction is anywhere
from 10 to 30% on average. And where I
think a lot of people blow it is they
just don't quantify that paint. They
just don't attach a dollar value to what
they're putting in from the customer.
And what happens when you don't do this
is you can't subsequently charge a fair
percentage for the work that you're
providing and then you are forced
instead to price off of really annoying
little things like complexity of the
system, the number of hours that you and
your team spend building it. You know,
the proxy or API key that you're using,
whatever. Basically, something that is
adjacent to the value but not actually
the value itself. So instead, you should
be telling your customers, especially if
they're small to mid-size businesses,
hey, this is costing you 45,000 bucks a
year, and you don't have to be paying
it. When you do this, and you make it
very clear, you can then segue to
charging a percentage of it, say 20%.
And then confidently asking them for
45,000 time 20%, which is, you know,
9,000 bucks a year. If the client has
internalized that they are currently
paying $45,000 a year for something and
if you put a solution in front of them
that is only $9,000 per year, you know,
the only situation which they would not
immediately say yes to that is they
didn't have the confidence that you
could fulfill on that solution, which in
all honesty is a lot smaller of a
problem to solve versus just building
the value like I'm talking about. So,
nobody is doing this. Instead, in an
attempt to sound really sophisticated,
which may be a product of, you know,
naivity or maybe just our industry, I'm
seeing a lot of people use terms like
inefficiency. You're currently suffering
inefficiencies or optimization. There's
a lot of room for optimization, but you
know, just to get down to brass tax,
that means absolutely nothing. Do not
veil how much money the customer is
currently spending on a solution in
sophisticated sounding language. Just be
very blunt. You know, if you could talk
the language of money, people generally,
at least I find, respect you a lot more.
If you can do it on a proposal, the
likelihood of you winning that proposal
just goes up way more. So, how do you
actually do this in practice? How do you
assign actual dollar value to problems?
I always see things in terms of three
layers. The first layer is hard costs.
So what is the cash amount that they are
actively spending on a solution they
don't need to? What software platform
are they spending money on? What CRM are
they spending money on that like they
don't need to. So this is the direct
expense. The second layer is in the
opportunity cost. And this is kind of a
little bit more difficult to understand.
But essentially this is the growth that
they are missing because they're
spending time, energy and money solving
this problem which they don't have to be
instead of probably more pressing ones
like revenue generation, lead genen, you
know, sales and so on and so forth. The
third layer is operational chaos which
is just the stress, the subjective
feelings and the inefficiency that
results from usually the founders,
directors or managers of a business not
really being able to show up as their
best selves. Uh it's the feelings of
overwhelm. It's the stuff that you can't
exactly write down on like a P&L
statement. So get in the habit of
diagnosing and then quantifying prices
like this and you'll do a lot better.
That said, you could still have the
perfect diagnosis and then completely
botch the deal if you communicate it
wrong. So we should probably talk a
little bit about communication. I find
that a lot of the time proposals will
bury the lead. And what I mean by that
is they will hide the point of the
proposal behind some very long, very
exhausting preamble. In reality, a
decision maker, a business owner for the
most part doesn't want to dig. They're
busy. You know, they want a clear line
from problem to solution. They want to
just like put in front of them. And you
do too. When you Google a recipe and you
click on a link, you do not want to
spend the next 15 minutes scrolling
through stories about the Yorkshshire
terrier of the writer and how they went
to Italy when they were in nth grade.
You want the recipe, you know? You don't
want to know how the tomatoes made it to
the freaking thing. You want to know
what to do with the tomatoes. So,
similarly, when somebody opens your
proposal, just get to the point. This is
not an SEO recipe blog article. This is
a proposal for services. So in order to
I guess constantly direct our efforts
towards that. I and leftclick use the
pyramid principle. When you're
explaining problems and solutions, don't
just spend all day building stuff up.
The whole point of the pyramid principle
is it just puts the point first and then
you just stack your supporting arguments
beneath. If you remember earlier, all of
my examples were stuff like, hey, you're
suffering from X problem. It's costing
you $10,000 a month. Here's why. That
here's why is really important. What
we're doing is we're saying, hey, here's
what we think. Here's the problem that
we think you're suffering from. let me
support that now that I've you know made
my intentions clear with arguments,
facts, evidence and so on and so forth.
And rather unfortunately this is just
the way that human beings do things. We
usually see a conclusion and then we
rationalize it. So when you do things in
this way you're simply conforming to the
way that their brain's already working.
So each section should start with a
conclusion and then it should provide
evidence and should do that not the
other way around. The next thing I want
to talk about is staying minimal. Uh as
we know clients buy outcomes, they don't
buy technical specifications and they
certainly don't buy your design. What I
mean by this is you don't really need a
sexy, fancy, beautiful proposal. You
don't need gorgeous designs, uh, the
sexiest backgrounds, all that stuff.
What you need, and what people tend to
appreciate, is a very straightforward
pitch written on basically the
equivalent of a Google doc. Now,
obviously, you can and should touch it
up a little bit. But the point that I'm
making is that you should keep your
proposal minimal and then focused on,
you know, the pain and the things that,
you know, you're promising your
customers more so than little frilly
design stuff. So my recommended
structure and I'm going to attach a link
down below with a very streamlined
version of it is you start with problem
then you go solution then you go
investment then finally at the end you
go agreement and actually also I'd
recommend attaching a payment method
directly to your proposal if possible. I
know a few platforms like Pandanda do
this and it makes your life a lot
easier. The reason why is cuz you know
instead of things being like a three or
four-step process where you send a
proposal somebody has to sign that you
have to send the agreement then they
have to sign that then after that they
have to pay you know instead of all that
they just do it all in one. I'm a real
big fan of proposal platforms that let
you do that and I highly recommend that
you do that as well. And actually, just
while I'm on it, a couple of additional
points. You should keep your
deliverables pretty concrete, but then
give yourself flexibility through a term
like the term equivalent just in systems
and automations and AI consulting. You
know, if you're saying, "Hey, we're
going to use XYZ platform." If for
whatever reason you can't actually
proceed with XYZ platform because
there's some scope change or some
breaking API update or something like
that. If you have XYZ platform or
equivalent like air table or equivalent,
you can technically remain within the
confines of that scope which is
valuable. Another tip is just to keep
your timeline really simple if you guys
are going to have one. And then another
one is if you are working with small to
mid-size businesses, I recommend keeping
your legal agreement part very minimal.
You know, like three or four classes,
definitely not a four or five page term
because it's just way too much friction.
you're basically giving them a reason to
say, "Well, I'll have my attorney look
at this and get back to you." So, I'm
not a lawyer. Uh, and this is not legal
advice, but in my experience, having a
very protracted agreement is totally
unnecessary, especially for small toiz
businesses. The reason why is you're
probably never actually going to be able
to legally enforce it. Nor would it
really be worth your time if you're a
very small business since the total
contract value is probably going to be
less than the opportunity cost you would
be uh suffering from if you actually
went ahead with it. Not to mention, if
you live in a different jurisdiction or
a different country or a different
region, it just makes things way more
complicated. All right, another big
point. Proposals can be pretty valuable,
right? If you crush a proposal, your
business might make, you know, $100,000
over the course of the next year for
something that's like between five to
eight grand a month. So, if you really
want to nail it, like if you're going to
spend time in your business, where the
hell else are you going to spend this
time? Okay, I would recommend rather
than just copying and pasting a template
verbatim that just, you know, goes,
"Greetings, executive summary. We are
selling X, Y, and Z. Our agency has been
around for 14 years." You know, don't do
that. spend your time actually
personalizing the intro and then like
writing it to a person as if it's like a
letter. And the benefit to that is if
the beginning of your proposal is
customized, oftentimes prospects will
assume that the rest of the proposal is
customized, which is inherently
leveraged and it means you don't
actually have to spend all that much
time doing it. But like just logically
speaking, like if you send out let's say
five proposals and on average your
conversion rate is 20%. After you send
out those five proposals, you will on
average win one deal. If your lifetime
value is, let's say, $20,000, what that
means is, you know, you've won a $20,000
deal per five proposals, what that means
is the value of an individual proposal
is $4,000. Okay? Every time you write a
proposal, the net gain that you are
making, the expected value of doing so
is $4,000. So, logically speaking, how
much time are you guys willing to spend
to make $4,000? I know I'm willing to
spend a fair amount of time. you know,
if it's like the difference between
copying and pasting a template and
having like a 10% conversion rate versus
spending 5 minutes doing something and
then having like a 20% conversion rate,
obviously you should choose to spend 5
minutes customizing something to get
that 20% conversion rate. So, you know,
like this boils down to another very
important point that I don't think a lot
of people realize in consulting or the
agency space more generally, but you
have a ton of power and potential if you
spend your time on specific points and
if you apply pressure to specific points
in your business that actually pay off.
Don't try automating or process
optimizing or delegating every little
thing. Instead, ask yourself like what
does it make sense for me to spend my
time on? And that tends to just be, you
know, lead genen, sales, things that are
uh usually very proximal to like the
actual revenue generation. Okay, just to
round it out, going to give you a quick
list of tips. I recommend using a
Spartan tone of voice. If a small to
mid-size business and you're talking to
the business owner themselves, I'd
actually recommend using first or second
person, aka I and you, I would not
recommend using third person like we and
the business. Uh, but if it's enterprise
and if they're multiple stakeholders,
like if it's not just going to be one
decision maker, reviewing the thing,
then I recommend third person. I've just
run some tests on this and I find my
conversion rates a lot higher. for SMBs
when I say IU and then enterprise, you
know, if it's we and and we make the
business seem bigger. In general, short
active sentences, you're not going to
win like a freaking Pulitzer prize here
if you're writing, but you should
definitely run spellch check and grammar
check religiously. I've received so many
proposals just in the last year that
have had very simple spelling mistakes.
And if I'm honest, I don't actually give
a about spelling mistakes. But what
I do care about is your attention to
detail. And if before we've even done
any sort of engagement whatsoever,
you're already showing me that you're
not an attentive person. The probability
of me saying yes to a later engagement
is pretty low. Drop the title page. I
find that just needless friction. And
when you do put your price in, do it
last and then frame it as an investment.
Don't frame it as a cost. Uh don't use
stock photos. No fancy graphics. Nobody
really cares about that. You know, this
isn't like a marketing brochure. It is a
business document. So you should treat
it as such. If you have case studies, I
would definitely add a few. Maybe you
could sprinkle them in between the
problem and the solution/scope and the
solution/scope and the investment. Okay.
So that's it. As you guys could probably
tell, I've written tons of proposals
over the years. So, if you guys need
help with implementing high-quality
proposals into your own business, that
is actually a portion of what we now
focus on at Leftclick. So, reach out.
Uh, we've developed systems that will
automatically template out most of a
very highquality consulting proposal
using AI based off of stuff like a sales
call transcript or form that you fill
out. It's a very popular system. A lot
of people that we work with do so and
then they see significant improvements
in their throughput. So, we'd love to
build one for you. Just book a call with
my team. Otherwise, I hope you guys now
understand how to not drop the ball on
your proposals, how to actually make
client consulting documents that get
your guys deals closed. Um, thanks as
always for watching. Looking forward to
seeing you in the next video. Have a
lovely rest of the day. by